SecureShift frontend onboarding
Current setup instructions are in sections 3 and 6 and the root README.md.
Other team/process descriptions below are historical trimester handover context;
feature completion, priorities, blockers, and PR targets must be rechecked.


 
Secure Shift  
Onboarding for the frontend  
1.Welcome 
Welcome to the SecureShift Frontend Panel Team! 
Congratulations on joining the project. We are excited to have you on board and look forward to 
working with you throughout this trimester. 
SecureShift is a large, real-world software engineering project where students collaborate in agile 
teams to develop a workforce management platform for the security industry. As members of the 
Frontend Team, you will contribute to building intuitive, reliable, and scalable user interfaces 
while working closely with the Backend and Mobile teams. 
Whether you are new to React or already have frontend development experience, this guide will 
help you understand the project, set up your development environment, and begin contributing 
effectively. 
 
 
2.About SecureShift 
SecureShift is a workforce management platform designed to simplify the daily operations of 
security companies. 
The system enables employers to manage every aspect of their workforce from a single 
application. 
Main Features 
• Shift Management  
• Employee Management  
• Attendance Tracking  
• Payroll Management  
• Incident Reporting  
• Equipment Management  
• Employer and Guard Communication  
• Notifications  
• Multi-language Support  
• Dashboard and Analytics  
Example Workflow 
Without SecureShift: 
Employer creates shifts manually → Contacts guards individually → Attendance is recorded on 
paper → Payroll is calculated manually. 
With SecureShift: 
Employer creates a shift → Guard receives notification → Guard accepts shift → Guard checks 
in using the mobile app → Attendance is recorded automatically → Payroll is generated digitally. 
 
3.Project Architecture 
The current monorepo contains app-backend (Express API),
app-frontend/employer-panel (React, host port 3000),
app-frontend/admin-panel (React, host port 3001), and guard_app (Expo mobile).
The backend defaults to host port 5000, with overrides such as 5001.
Both web panels and the Guard App share the backend API.
 
4.Technology Stack 
Technology Purpose 
React Frontend Development 
React Router Navigation 
Axios API Communication 
Material UI User Interface Components 
Node.js Backend Development 
Express REST API Framework 
MongoDB Database 
Docker Local Development Environment 
GitHub Version Control 
MS Planner Sprint Management 
Swagger API Documentation 
Postman API Testing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.Employer Panel Overview 
The Employer Panel allows employers to manage the entire workforce through an easy-to-use 
web interface. 
Some of the pages include: 
• Dashboard  
• Shift Management  
• Timesheets  
• Payroll  
• Guard Management  
• Incident Reports  
• Equipment Management  
• Notifications  
• Chat  
• Daily Activity Tracking  
• Profile Management  
Most frontend tasks involve creating user interfaces, integrating APIs, handling application state, 
validating forms, and improving user experience. 
 
6.Development Environment Setup 
The repository-root README.md is the canonical full-stack quickstart.
Clone the monorepo once:

git clone https://github.com/Gopher-Industries/SecureShift.git 
cd SecureShift 
 
First-time setup requires Docker with Compose, not private credentials or a
backend .env. Optional root .env port overrides are documented in .env.example.
 
docker compose up --build -d
docker compose ps -a
docker compose logs ollama-models ai-indexer
 
Services: backend, mongodb, mailpit, frontend-employer, frontend-admin, ollama,
ollama-models, ai-indexer. ollama-models and ai-indexer are one-shot jobs;
Exited (0) means success. Models: nomic-embed-text:latest and llama3.2:latest.
The backend does not wait for indexing.

After successful indexing, ensure the backend loads the regenerated vectors:

If the backend is already running:
docker compose restart backend

If the backend is not currently running:
docker compose up -d backend

Check backend health:
curl http://localhost:5000/api/v1/health
 
Backend HTTP 200 does not guarantee AI/index readiness. Vectors load at startup.
Compose Ollama is not published to the host. See the root README for host AI
requirements and indexing all three TXT sources: backend_onboarding_v1.1.txt,
onboarding.txt, guard_app_onboarding.txt. To rebuild after source updates:

docker compose run --rm ai-indexer

After successful indexing, ensure the backend loads the regenerated vectors:

If the backend is already running:
docker compose restart backend

If the backend is not currently running:
docker compose up -d backend

Vector regeneration for this documentation handover is deferred until review.
Open employer http://localhost:3000, admin http://localhost:3001, Swagger
http://localhost:5000/api-docs. Substitute 5001 if the backend port is overridden.
MongoDB uses host port 27017. Mailpit SMTP/UI use 1025/8025; read local login OTP
messages at http://localhost:8025. Mailpit requires no private SMTP credentials.

For normal daily restart:

docker compose up -d
docker compose ps -a

Check one-shot logs if indexing runs again. After success, use the restart/start
commands above to load regenerated vectors.
Normal shutdown, preserving data, models and uploads:

docker compose down 
 
WARNING: docker compose down -v deletes MongoDB data, downloaded Ollama models,
and uploads. It is not routine cleanup.
 
Use the component READMEs for host development. Backend Node minimum is
>=22.13.0; use npm ci. Runtime validation: Node v22.13.1; stable backend CI:
npm run test:ci, 5 suites, 91/91 passing tests in the handover snapshot.
Normal seed commands and optional destructive reset commands are separate in
app-backend/README.md. Never run a reset as part of routine setup.
 
7.Understanding the Frontend Project Structure 
You will mainly work within the following folders: 
src/                                                               
components/ 
pages/ 
layouts/ 
hooks/ 
services/ 
routes/ 
assets/ 
utils/ 
Example 
Suppose you are assigned the task: 
"Improve the Payroll Page." 
You may need to modify: 
pages/Payroll.jsx 
services/payrollService.js 
components/PayrollTable.jsx 
The page displays the data, the service communicates with the backend, and the component 
presents reusable UI elements. 
 
8.How Frontend Communicates with Backend 
Most pages follow the same flow: 
1. User performs an action.  
2. React component captures the event.  
3. Axios sends a request to the backend API.  
4. Backend processes the request.  
5. MongoDB stores or retrieves data.  
6. Backend returns a response.  
7. React updates the interface.  
Example 
When an employer approves a shift: 
User clicks "Approve" 
↓ 
React calls 
POST /api/shifts/approve 
↓ 
Backend validates request 
↓ 
Database updates 
↓ 
 
Frontend refreshes 
↓ 
Status changes to "Approved" 
 
9.Git Workflow 
We follow a feature-branch workflow. 
Never develop directly on the main branch. 
Typical workflow: 
1. Pull the latest main branch.  
2. Create a new feature branch.  
3. Implement your feature.  
4. Test locally.  
5. Commit changes.  
6. Push your branch.  
7. Create a Pull Request.  
8. Wait for review before merging.  
Example branch names: 
frontend/yourname-payroll-page 
frontend / yourname -dashboard-improvements 
frontend / yourname -chat-notification 
frontend / yourname -equipment-management 
 
10.Coding Standards 
To maintain consistency across the project: 
• Follow ESLint rules.  
• Use Prettier formatting.  
• Write reusable React components.  
• Keep components modular.  
• Avoid unnecessary duplication.  
• Write meaningful commit messages.  
• Keep Pull Requests focused on one feature.  
 
11.Historical Project Status
The previous team completed significant development across the project. 
Employer Panel 
Completed: 
• Timesheets  
• Payroll  
• Daily Activity Tracking  
• Employer Dashboard  
• Chat System  
• Notifications  
• Equipment Management  
• Multi-language Support  
• Privacy Policy  
• Terms and Conditions  
• UI Improvements  
• Bug Fixes  
• Security Improvements  
 
12.Historical Priorities for the Handover Trimester
As the new Frontend Team, our priorities include: 
• Completing remaining backend integrations.  
• Implementing newly designed Figma pages.  
• Improving application performance.  
• Fixing existing bugs.  
• Strengthening frontend security.  
• Increasing test coverage.  
• Supporting AI feature integration.  
• Improving overall user experience.  
 
13.Historical Known Issues
Some issues remain from the previous trimester. 
Guard Page 
Currently blocked due to a backend Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) issue. 
The frontend implementation is mostly complete but cannot retrieve guard data until the backend 
issue is resolved. 
 
14.Team Communication 
Our primary communication platforms are: 
• Microsoft Teams  
• GitHub  
• MS Planner  
Please keep your Planner tasks updated and communicate any blockers early. 
If you are stuck on a task for an extended period, ask for assistance rather than waiting. 
 
15.Pull Request Checklist 
Before submitting a Pull Request, ensure that: 
• The application builds successfully.  
• Your feature has been tested locally.  
• ESLint passes without errors.  
• No unnecessary files are included.  
• Screenshots are attached (where applicable).  
• The Pull Request description clearly explains your changes.  
16.Resources 
Please familiarise yourself with the following resources before starting development: 
• GitHub Repository  
• Swagger API Documentation  
• System Architecture Document  
• Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD)  
• Figma Designs  
• User Manual  
• MS Planner  
 
17.Tips for Success 
• Pull the latest changes regularly.  
• Test before committing.  
• Keep commits small and meaningful.  
• Read the API documentation before integrating endpoints.  
• Ask questions whenever something is unclear.  
• Collaborate with teammates and support one another.  
• Focus on writing clean, maintainable code rather than rushing to complete tasks.  
 
18.Final Message 
SecureShift is more than a university assignment—it is an opportunity to experience professional 
software development practices in a collaborative environment. 
Throughout this trimester, you will work with modern technologies, follow Agile methodologies, 
participate in code reviews, collaborate across multiple teams, and contribute to a real-world 
application. 
Every contribution, whether it is a new feature, a bug fix, or a code improvement, plays an 
important role in the success of the project. 
On behalf of the Frontend Team, welcome to SecureShift. We look forward to working with you 
and wish you a successful and enjoyable trimester.
